---
layout: research
title:  "SLIDE: Significant Latent Factor Interaction Discovery and Exploration across biological domains"
date: 19 February 2024
categories: research
---

_Modern multiomic technologies can generate deep multiscale profiles. However, differences in data modalities, multicollinearity of the data, and large numbers of irrelevant features make analyses and integration of high-dimensional omic datasets challenging. Here we present Significant Latent Factor Interaction Discovery and Exploration (SLIDE), a first-in-class interpretable machine learning technique for identifying significant interacting latent factors underlying outcomes of interest from high-dimensional omic datasets. SLIDE makes no assumptions regarding data-generating mechanisms, comes with theoretical guarantees regarding identifiability of the latent factors/corresponding inference, and has rigorous false discovery rate control. Using SLIDE on single-cell and spatial omic datasets, we uncovered significant interacting latent factors underlying a range of molecular, cellular and organismal phenotypes. SLIDE outperforms/performs at least as well as a wide range of state-of-the-art approaches, including other latent factor approaches. More importantly, it provides biological inference beyond prediction that other methods do not afford. Thus, SLIDE is a versatile engine for biological discovery from modern multiomic datasets._

Rahimikollu J, Xiao H, **Rosengart A**, Rosen ABI, Tabib T, Zdinak PM, He K, Bing X, Bunea F, Wegkamp M, Poholek A, Joglekar A, Lafyatis R, Das J. SLIDE: Significant Latent Factor Interaction Discovery and Exploration across biological domains. _Nature Methods_ (2024). [doi:10.1038/s41592-024-02175-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-024-02175-z).

---

That's just the abstract! Read the full journal article at [Nature Methods](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-024-02175-z).

