---
layout: distill
title:  Martingales
description: A Primer
date: 2025-05-20
tabs: true
tags: theory probability stochastic-processes primer
toc:
  - name: Definitions
    subsections:
        - name: Properties
  - name: Martingales
bibliography: 2025-05-20-martingales.bib
---

This post works through highlights of Aaditya Ramdas' 2018 minicourse<d-cite key=ramdas2018></d-cite> on martingales at Carnegie Mellon University with some supplemental information taken Durrett<d-cite key=durrett2019></d-cite> and some definitions from Wikipedia. Additional definitions are from Shafer et al.<d-cite key=shafer2011></d-cite> and Ramdas et al.<d-cite key=ramdas2022></d-cite>.

This is mostly for my own benefit because I have trouble conceptualizing (and then remembering) many topics in stochastic processes. The main topic of this post will be the <i>martingale</i> (to be more rigously defined later). We can think of a martingale as the amount of wealth a player has at a given round (time point) in a betting game. 

---

## Definitions

We now continue with several "building block" definitions covered in Ramdas et al.<d-cite key=ramdas2022></d-cite>. We start with the $p$-process, which is sometimes called the <i>anytime-valid $p$-value</i> in other works.

<div id="p-process"></div>
<div class="definition">
  <strong>Definition ($p$-Process).</strong>
  <br>
  Let $H_0$ be some hypothesis. A <i>$p$-process</i> is any sequence of $p$-values $(p_t)_{t \in T}$ (with index set $T$) such that $\mathbb{P}_{H_0}(p_\tau \leq a) \leq a$ for all $a \in [0, 1]$ for any arbitrary stopping time, $\tau$. 
</div>

Intuitively, a $p$-process is simply a sequence of $p$-values satisfying the condition that, if we were to stop our sequence at any time (and the stopping time can be whatever we want — even data-dependent!), then the probability that the $p$-value is, at most, any value in $[0, 1]$ cannot exceed that value (kinda like calibration).

<div id="e-process"></div>
<div class="definition">
  <strong>Definition ($e$-Process).</strong>
  <br>
  Let $H_0$ be some hypothesis. An <i>e-process</i> is any non-negative sequence $(e_t)_{t \in T}$ (with index set $T$) such that $\mathbb{E}_{H_0}[e_\tau] \leq 1$ for any arbitrary stopping time, $\tau$.
</div>

Examples of $e$-processes include test martingales and test supermartingales. Related to the $e$-process is the $e$-value.

<div id="e-value"></div>
<div class="definition">
  <strong>Definition ($e$-Value).</strong>
  <br>
    Let $H_0$ denote a null hypothesis about the distribution of our data $X = (X_1, \dots, X_\tau)$, which is a sequence of observations with stopping time/sample size $\tau$. 
    An <i>$e$-variable</i> or <i>$e$-statistic</i> is a non-negative random variable $E = E(X)$ such that, for all $P \in H_0$, $\mathbb{E}_P[E] \leq 1$. An <i>$e$-value</i> is a value taken on by $E$, but is commonly used to refer to the $e$-statistic itself. 
</div>

<!-- There are many ways to think about $e$-values and $e$-statistics. FILL IN THIS PART? https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E-values -->

---
We now turn to ideas in stochastic processes. 

<div id="random-walk"></div>
<div class="definition">
  <strong>Definition (Random Walk).</strong>
  <br>
    Let $X_1, X_2, \dots$ denote independent and identically distributed random variables in $\mathbb{R}$. The sum of the first $n$, $S_n = X_1 + X_2 + \dots + X_n$, is a <i>random walk</i>.
</div>

A random walk is a very basic stochastic process. If the walk satisfies the condition that $\mathbb{P}(X_i = 1) = \mathbb{P}(X_i = -1) = \frac{1}{2}$ (i.e. the random variables take values in $\{ -1, 1\}$ equiprobably), then $S_n$ is a <i>simple random walk</i>. 

Suppose we want to conceptualize the information we have at time $n$. One way to do so would be to consider the $\sigma$-field generated by $X_1, \dots, X_n$. This leads to the <i>filtration</i>.

<div id="filtration"></div>
<div class="definition">
  <strong>Definition (Filtration).</strong>
  <br>
  Let $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, P)$ be a probability space, and let $I$ be an index set equipped with a total order denoted by $\leq$. 

  For every $i \in I$, let $\mathcal{F}_i$ be a sub-$\sigma$-field of $\mathcal{F}$. A <i>filtration</i>, denoted by $\mathbb{F} = (\mathcal{F}_i)_{i \in I}$ is the set of all such $\mathcal{F}_i$ such that $\mathcal{F}_k \subseteq \mathcal{F}_l$ for all $k \leq l$. 
</div>

Intuitively, a filtration is a collection of sub-$\sigma$-fields of $\mathcal{F}$ that has a non-decreasing order that captures the information had up to a given point (usually in time). We can kind of think about filtrations as keeping track of all of the questions we can answer about our process.

At timepoint $t=0$, we know very little about our stochastic process. We know that $(X_t)_{t\in T}$ each take on <i>some</i> value in $\mathcal{F}$, and we know that they <i>must</i> take on values in $\mathcal{F}$. However, that's all we know. Thus, $$\mathcal{F}_0 = \{ F_0, \emptyset \}$$ where $F_0 = \mathcal{F}^{\rvert T \rvert}$, the $\rvert T \rvert$-ary Cartesian power of $\mathcal{F}$. 

At timepoint $t = 1$, we gain the knowledge of the outcome of $X_1$, and we can therefore answer any question that is only about $X_1$. Some simple examples include "Is $X_1 = 0, 1$ or $2$?" or "Is $X_1$ odd?". Thus, $$\mathcal{F}_1 = \{ A \times F^{\rvert T \rvert - 1} \rvert A \subseteq \mathcal{P}(\mathcal{F}) \}$$ where $\mathcal{P}(S)$ denotes the power set of set $S$. In words, $\mathcal{F}_1$ allows us to answer any question about $X_1$ <i>but nothing about the rest of the process</i>.

This sort of relationship continues for all of the sub-$\sigma$-fields in our filtration. Each successive sub-$\sigma$-field, $$\mathcal{F}_{t + 1}$$ contains all of the information about our stochastic process's past development. From our explanation for $t=1$, it is clear that $$\mathcal{F}_t \subseteq \mathcal{F}_{t+1}$$. However, $\mathcal{F}_{t+1}$ contains finer grained subsets since we gain knowledge about an additional timepoint in our process.

<div class="example">
  <strong>Example (Filtration).</strong>
  <br>
  Suppose we are flipping a coin two times. Let the tuple $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, P)$ denote the probability space upon which the random variables representing these flips are defined. The sample space, $\Omega$, is the set $\{ HH, HT, TH, TT \}$. 
  <br>
  At $t = 0$, $\mathcal{F}_0 = \{ \emptyset, \Omega \}$, since we don't know anything about what the outcomes will be. 
  <br>
  At $t = 1$, we observe one coin flip, which has to either come out as heads or tails. Thus, $\mathcal{F}_1 = \{ \emptyset, \Omega, \{ HH, HT \}, \{ TH, TT \} \}$. We can interpret the additional two sets as showing us the possible outcomes once we have observed the first flip. $\{ HH, HT \}$ states that, once we see a $H$, that the only possible final results are $HH$ or $HT$.
  <br>
  At $t = 2$, we observe the second coin flip, so we know everything about this process. $\mathcal{F}_2 = \{ \emptyset, \Omega, \{ HH, HT \}, \{ TH, TT \}, \{ HH \}, \{ HT \}, \{ TT \}, \{ TH \} \}$. Similar to the case with $\mathcal{F}_1$, after we see both flips, we only have one possible outcome (the one we observed). Thus, we add all singleton sets. Notice that this is $\mathcal{P}(\Omega)$, the power set of the sample space. 
</div>

The natural filtration is the $\sigma$-field generated by $(X_s)_{s \leq t}$. 

<div id="natural-filtration"></div>
<div class="definition">
  <strong>Definition (Natural Filtration).</strong>
  <br>
  Let $X: T \times \Omega \rightarrow S$ be a stochastic process on probability space $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, P)$ with (measurable) state space $(S, \Sigma)$. The <i>natural filtration of $\mathcal{F}$ with respect to $X$</i> is the filtration $\mathbb{F}^X = (\mathcal{F}_t^X)_{t \in T}$ where:

  $$
  \mathcal{F}_t^X = \sigma\left(X^{-1}_j(A) \big\rvert j \in T, j \leq t \text{ and } A \in \Sigma\right)
  \nonumber
  $$
</div>

A stochastic process $$(X_t)_{t \in T}$$ is said to be <i>adapted to the filtration $\mathbb{F}$</i> if $X_t: \Omega \rightarrow S$ is a $(\mathcal{F}_t, \Sigma)$-measurable function for all $t \in T$.

For a filtration $\mathcal{F}_n$ with $n \geq 0$, we call a sequence $H_n$ for $n \geq 1$ <i>predictable</i> if $H_n$ is $$\mathcal{F}_{n-1}$$-measurable for all $n \geq 1$. 

### Properties
Sometimes we need additional assumptions to hold on a given filtration. One is <i>continuity</i>, and another is <i>completeness</i>.

<div id="continuous"></div>
<div class="definition">
  <strong>Definition (Right-Continuity).</strong>
  <br>
  Let $\mathbb{F} = (\mathcal{F}_t)_{t \in T}$ be a filtration. If, for all $t \in T$, $\mathcal{F}_t = \bigcap_{s > t} \mathcal{F}_s$, then we call $\mathbb{F}$ <i>right-continuous</i>.
</div>

<div id="complete"></div>
<div class="definition">
  <strong>Definition (Complete).</strong>
  <br>
  Let $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, P)$ be a probability space, and let $N_P = \{ A \subseteq \Omega \rvert A \subseteq B, B \in \mathcal{F} \text{ s.t. } P(B) = 0 \}$ be the set of all sets contained in the null set (with respect to $P$). We call a filtration $(\mathcal{F}_t)_{t \in T}$ <i>complete</i> if $N_P \subseteq \mathcal{F}_t$ for all $t$.
  <br>
  Equivalently, $(\mathcal{F}_t)_{t \in T}$ is complete if $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}_i, P)$ is a complete measure space for all $t$. 
</div>

We can define the <i>$P$-completion of a $\sigma$-field</i>, $\mathcal{F}$, as the union of $\mathcal{F}$ with all sets $E \in \Omega$ such that $P(E) = 0$. 

A probability space $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, P)$ equipped with filtration $$\mathbb{F} = (\mathcal{F}_t)_{t \geq 0}$$ where $\mathcal{F}_t$ is a sub-$\sigma$-field of $\mathcal{F}$ is called a <i>filtered probability space</i>.

Stochastic processes can also be described by a <i>stopping time</i>, which is another random variable the describes when a stochastic process will display some phenomenon or behavior. 

<div id="stopping-time"></div>
<div class="definition">
  <strong>Definition (Stopping Time).</strong>
  <br>
  Let $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, \mathbb{F}, P)$ be a filtered probability space. Let $\tau$ be a random variable defined on this space and taking values in index set $T$. $\tau$ is a <i>stopping time</i> (with respect to $\mathbb{F} = (\mathcal{F}_t)_{t \in T}$) if $\{ \tau \leq t \} \in \mathcal{F}_t$ for all $t \in T$. 
</div>

In simpler terms, $\tau \in \{ 0, 1, 2, \dots \} \cup \{ \infty \}$ is a <i>stopping time</i> if, for any $n \in \mathbb{N}$, the event $\{ \tau = n \}$ is entirely known just from the information up until time $n$ (i.e. determined by $\{X_1, \dots, X_n\}$). This can be written as $\{ \tau = n \} \in \mathcal{F}_n$. 

<div id="stopping-time-ex"></div>
<div class="example">
  <strong>Example (Stopping Time).</strong>
  <br>
  Let $X_1, X_2, \dots$ be random variables in $\mathbb{R}$. Let $S_n = X_1 + \dots + X_n$. The random variable defined by:
  $$
  \tau = \inf\{t \rvert S_t \geq c \}
  \nonumber
  $$
  for $c \in \mathbb{R}$ is a stopping time. 
</div>

Constant times (e.g. $\tau = c$ for some $c \in \{ 0, 1, 2, \dots \} \cup \{ \infty \}$) are stopping times, and the minimum and maximum of two stopping times is also a valid stopping time. 

---

## Martingales
Related to stochastic processes and filtrations is the <i>martingale</i>. Here I'll cover some basic definitions, but interested readers can see my post on martingales for more details.

<div id="martingale"></div>
<div class="definition">
  <strong>Definition (Martingale).</strong>
  <br>
  Let $S$ be a Banach space with norm $\rvert \rvert \cdot \rvert \rvert_S$. A stochastic process $X: T \times \Omega \rightarrow S$ on $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, P)$ with state space $(S, \Sigma)$ is called a <i>martingale with respect to the filtration $\mathbb{F} = \{ \mathcal{F}_t: t \in T \}$ and probability measure $P$</i> if:

  <ol>
    <li>$\mathbb{F}$ is a filtration of $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, P)$</li>
    <li>$X$ is adapted to $\mathbb{F}$ (i.e. $X_t$ is $\mathcal{F}_t$-measurable for all $t \in T$)</li>
    <li>For all $t \in T$, $\mathbb{E}_P[ \rvert \rvert X_t \rvert \rvert_S ] < +\infty$</li>
    <li>For all $s, t \in T$ with $s < t$, and for all subsets $F \in \mathcal{F}_s$, $\mathbb{E}_P[\mathbf{1}\{(X_t - X_s) \in F \}] = 0$</li>
  </ol>

  This last condition can be rewritten in terms of the conditional expectation with respect to a sub-$\sigma$-field: $\mathbb{E}_P[ X_t \rvert \mathcal{F}_s ] = 0$. This notation emphasizes that this expectation is an $\mathcal{F}_s$-measurable function. 

  Put more intuitively, albeit with some simplification, a discrete-time martingale is a stochastic process $\{ X(t, \omega): t \in T, \omega \in \Omega\}$ such that, for any $t \in T$:

  <ol>
    <li>$\mathbb{E}[\rvert X_t \rvert] < \infty$</li>
    <li>$\mathbb{E}[X_{t+1} \rvert X_1, \dots, X_t] = X_t$</li>
  </ol>
</div>

A relaxation of the condition of a martingale leads to the following object used frequently in game theoretic statistics.

<div id="supermartingale"></div>
<div class="definition">
  <strong>Definition (Supermartingale).</strong>
  <br>
  Let $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, P)$ be a probability space. Let $( X_t )_{t \in T}$ be a stochastic process (with index set $T = \{ 0, 1, \dots \}$ or $T = [0, \infty)$) defined on this space, and let $\mathbb{F} = ( \mathcal{F}_t )_{t \in T}$ be a filtration of sub-$\sigma$-fields of $\mathcal{F}$ (i.e. $\mathcal{F}_t \subseteq \mathcal{F}$ for all $t \in T$). $(X_t, \mathcal{F}_t)$ is a <i>supermartingale</i> if:
  <ul>
    <li>$X_t$ is $\mathcal{F}_t$-measurable for all $t \in T$ (i.e. $(X_t)_{t \in T}$ is adapted to $\mathbb{F}$)</li>
    <li>$X_t$ is integrable for all $t \in T$</li>
    <li>$\mathbb{E}[X_t \rvert \mathcal{F}_s] \leq X_s$ for all $t \in T$ and all $s < t$ almost surely</li>
  </ul>

  We also call the stochastic process $(X_t)_{t \in T}$ a supermartingale if $(X_t, \mathcal{F}_t)$ is a supermartingale and $\mathcal{F}_t$ is the $\sigma$-field generated by $X_t$. 
</div>

More specifically, game theoretic statistics makes use of the <i>test supermartingale</i>.

<div id="test-supermartingale"></div>
<div class="definition">
  <strong>Definition (Test Supermartingale).</strong>
  <br>
  A supermartingale $(X_t, \mathcal{F}_t)_{t \in T}$ is called a <i>test supermartingale</i> if $X_t \geq 0$ for all $t$ and $\mathbb{E}[X_0] \leq 1$ (or $X_0 = 1$, which is basically the same as the previous statement if we set $X_t = 1$ for $t < 0$).
  <br>
  Similarly, a <i>test martingale</i> is a non-negative martingale such that $\mathbb{E}[X_0] = 1$. 
</div>

Intuitively, a test supermartingale describes the cumulative gain or loss of a player in game where they bet against some hypothesis described by $P$. The initial condition basically specifies the amount of capital the player begins with (1 dollar), and the non-negatively condition ensures the player never loses (cumulatively) more than the initial dollar they they started with. 

If the player has a lot of money at round $t$ (i.e. large $X_t$), then they have evidence against $P$ being true. This interpretation makes sense when you think about real betting. Winning big is rare at a casino, so having a large payout is associated with low probability events in a game. 

One property of test supermartingales is the <i>maximal inequality</i>:

$$
P\left( \underset{ t \leq \infty}{\sup} X_t  \geq c \right)\leq \frac{1}{c} \hspace{5mm} \forall c \geq 1
$$

This inequality states thats the probability (with respect to the probability measure, $P$, of our probability space) that our test supermartingale exceeds some value, $c$, that is at least $1$ is inversely related to the magnitude of $c$. This implies that the probability that a player earns an infinite amount of money in the game is zero. 

A <i>very</i> important result in probability theory is <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ville%27s_inequality&oldid=1213448789">Ville's inequality</a>, which upperbounds the probability a supermartingale gets at least as big as some chosen value.

<div id="ville-inequality"></div>
<div class="theorem">
  <strong>Theorem (Ville's Inequality).</strong>
  {% tabs ville %}
  {% tab ville statement %}
  Let $(X_t)_{t = 0}^\infty$ be a non-negative supermartingale. For any positive $a \in \mathbb{R}$:

  $$
  \mathbb{P}\left( \underset{n \geq 0}{\sup} X_n \geq a \right) \leq \frac{\mathbb{E}[X_0]}{a}
  $$
  {% endtab %}
  {% tab ville proof %}
  Proof to be completed.
  {% endtab %}
  {% endtabs %}
  </div>
